thank you Melissa and good evening I
must say that one of the great pleasures
of being a president of this institution
is to be able to have president's forum
and as the founder of president's Forum
Robert atam former president of theud
and my husband um actually would say you
know the only important thing about
President's forum is that the people
have to be famous and they have to be
interested
and indeed one of the things that we get
to do is to have a conversation with
interesting people accomplished people
to try to go beyond the obvious to probe
further into what makes them who they
are and as Melissa said that both sidar
mukarji and Sarah Z completely qualify
and more to be the president's Forum
guests how often is it that you can have
an amazing visual artist who has had
solo exhibitions in all major museums
including our own we have a show right
now who has been given the MacArthur
genius grants I know we're not supposed
to say that but we know it is um and who
is now just selected to represent the
United States at the next Venice B
Alle and to have a noted oncologist a
researcher a road scholar a recipient of
the Pulitzer Prize and the guardian book
prize for his amazing book The Emperor
of all melodies a biography of Cancer
and a hero to many cancer survivors
patients and their families sidar
mukarji for Asia Society it's also
important because it so happens that
Sarah is Chinese American and Sitara is
Indian born in India Indian American
they both transcend cultures but are
also interested in cultures so it just
goes to say that we had no choice we had
to have them but more importantly I
think it is important to recognize that
both of them could actually be
individual guests for this program and I
must say as I Was preparing for this I
thought gosh I should have done that
having a conversation together with two
very interesting powerful people artists
scientists
writer it's complicated and I realize
that some of you are here because you're
fans of satar and some of you are here
because you love Sarah's work so I
apologize to all of you that you will
not be able to hear individually
everything these two could talk about
but we decided that actually the purpose
of this conversation is exactly what
they've never done before to have a
joint conversation so some of you will
be disappointed but we also agreed that
in fact to make this work we also will
have those of you who have read Sara's
book but may not Sarah's work to
actually give you some Taste of her work
and vice versa so this is really a
journey a conversation that in fact
they've never done publicly I'm sure
that they do it over breakfast and
dinners all the time um and and to
really go on a journey where we learn
about creative processes we learn about
crosscultural Connections and we also
learn about how we might think about
Arts and Sciences together so I feel
extremely privileged to actually begin
to have this conversation with sidartha
mukarji and Sarah Z please join me in
welcoming Sarah and S
[Applause]
thank you guys for being here and uh
you've been friends for the institution
for a while Sarah especially you since
we work with you in 2001 and sidarth is
almost like a family now since he's been
coming for a number of our shows and
other things as well let me really start
with um the very obvious question
and that is sartha you come from the
world of science but the way you write
is almost having a sense of poetry and
intuitiveness that comes through your
book Sarah you come from the world of
Arts but as Arthur Danto has said that
your work is almost like science
projects that there is a kind of
precision about that that's quite
different both of you I was very struck
reading Sara's book and your work that
you both seem to move in and out out of
going to the ultimate minute micro
things and move it back into macro that
you seem to be looking at details and
moving away from it and back and forth
Sid would you talk a little bit about
that in your work and how that plays out
for you and I know that you wanted to
also do some
reading um so first of all thank you for
having SAR me uh to this forum uh we
will I promise we will not balance our
checkbook or or do our
bills which I was since I'm not feeding
you yet either so right so you know as
as a as a writer or as a scientist of
course the question of scale is a is a
crucial question in in in my work um
there is a of course that famous quote
that God is in the detail in fact that's
almost correct in fact God is in the
scale um and and and the correct scale
is always uh something that I think all
writers artist scientists are constantly
working with uh and there is no correct
scale except scale always is is is in
service of an answer or in service of a
question so the question demands the
scale and when you answer the question
you're you're answering you're putting
the scale in congruence to the question
there is no absolute scale and this is
true for for all that work actually um
and so it's one thing that I actually
find particularly interesting that that
I explore all the time in in my work um
I was recently I wrote a piece for um
the the times the New York Times
magazine in which the question of scale
was of particular importance I'm just
going to read a little section of it
which I think is is interesting to me so
here I was asked to write a piece from
about memory um and the question was why
did they ask you to write about memory
you know that's interesting
question I I think there was something
in in when the editors were reading uh
emper maladies they began to be
interested in the question of where do
the where does memory play a role in in
this particular book um how does one
remember the past in order to understand
the future um and and and one of the
things that that that um Elena Silverman
who's one of my editors at the New York
Times magazine was very interested in is
again what are the most personal
elements of of memory and how do they
relate to uh uh today how do they relate
to contemporary conversation today so so
I I I was actually I I I sometimes say
that you often know the mood of a piece
of writing before you know the piece of
writing uh itself and and this one I
have a very clear vision of what
happened I was falling asleep one night
and I was thinking about this piece that
I was writing and I thought um and I
suddenly had the vision which then
becomes this piece and so I'm just going
to read just two little paragraphs from
it um and so so this is a this is a
piece called the letting go now
interestingly this piece was titled by
uh the magazine I didn't title it and I
looked back at it um and it turns out
the letting go is the name of a piece of
Sarah
sculpture did they know that no one knew
this it's from an Emily Dickson po
exactly but it remember the title of I
think the work I was making when I met
you yes awesome and I didn't title this
piece actually I mean I you know I all
of a sudden it's called
Serendipity it's called someone
[Laughter]
else um so so this is about um a moment
in in in my in my life in bin Banaras a
city that's actually very evocative to
me it had rained heavily the night
before the Steep Stone steps of the gut
that's the part that goes into the river
are slick and slippery and when my
father pulls me onto the boat the water
feels more stable than the ground The
Boatman rows out towards the open River
and the City of Bari swings into full
View view on the bank wrestlers are
performing calisthenics a vendor is
selling maragal a man is throwing bird
seed at pigeons the river moves
sluggishly at first but then a current
current forces the boat around the bend
and we're floating silently by the
manikarnika where the dead are burnt and
there already we've shifted the entire
it's as if the the piece of writing for
me at least has moved on a pivot you
start off with a memory that's very
small and now you're confronting the
actually the in in Banaras miles of
burning bodies on a gat um I'm eight or
nine years old save a distant Uncle
who's died of renal failure with a
catheter poking out of his pants I've
had no personal experience of death I
imagine it as little more than a
Corporal exit from the world and now
it's an unforgettable site row upon row
of burning bodies on the wooden P by The
River's Edge there are dozens of PES
lighted at the gut like lanterns along
the river along them around them circus
of death unfolds etc etc and then and
here here here's what here's another
switch that happens and this goes on in
the pets decades later having trained as
an oncologist in Boston I attend the
funeral service of a woman who has died
after a long battle with cancer I
remember approaching the coffin and then
registering something odd the woman has
been dressed up there's a faintest blush
of something lipstick on her
mouth and then I go on at Medical rounds
a few days later I ask some residents
and interns about death
how many have carried the body of a
parent what does that weight feel like
what about the ritual of bathing and
cleansing the dead so again this piece
is brings back to me some some of this
idea of scale shift because you move
from in time across a child who's eight
or nine years old who all of a sudden
rounds the bend of a river but the bend
of the river actually carries the shift
and scale um and then you move around
the bend of time which is the bend of
about 30 35 years and that also carries
a peculiar shift in scale because we're
not talking about one death or the
burning of the body we're talking about
the carriage of a parents body because I
have also now grown to 35 or 37 so
that's one illustration but and I
thought it was very interesting I
thought I picked up this piece I thought
it was interesting again right from the
title it's as if someone was watching
and making a connection between my work
and Sarah's work it's something that
comes through in your book profoundly
as you're going into a narrative of a
story come back again give us a broader
history of cancer then come back to a
story and I think Sarah in your work
there is that notion of the mundane and
the minute and then open it up again um
absolutely I um I brought also brought
some of my work upstairs but also in
slides um to show I to just talk about
some of these ideas that we came up with
that really cross I think between
our creative processes in a really
fundamental way so this I mean this idea
of SC scale shift has really always been
Central to my work not only is this am I
having a technical moment somebody
has is there a phone somewhere
ah but it's off so just put it away it's
a shift in scale scale moment so um this
is actually a piece that I did vishaka
curated me here and when the building
reopened in 200 one and um she asked me
if I wanted to do a a piece for the
reopening and um it was the third floor
was going to have U masterpieces from
the Rockefeller collection of Asian art
and I was really interested in this idea
of this Jos with a piece that where you
had these these absolute monuments you
know these verified masterpieces and
what what could you put in terms of
Contemporary Art next to this and how
could you shift that scale so I made a
piece that was actually I chose the
location of doing a piece by the freight
elevator on the third floor um so that
it was really this unused space that you
didn't expect to see artwork and I was
interested in this idea of actually how
you see an artwork what's your first
impression and how it's presented to you
how what is the actual experience of
seeing and I wanted to make a work that
wasn't on a pedestal that you didn't
expect to see that wasn't framed and
wasn't telling you I am a masterpiece
but that that you discovered and had the
sense of is anyone else know this is
here and that you're seeing it you sort
of actually make you know questioning
this idea of is this a work of art you
bend the river yes exactly so literally
come upon it exactly so you sort of you
actually you either come coming or you
actually were as you as you exited the
Rockefeller collection it was framed in
the window far away and you opened out
onto this um I wanted to to play with
this idea
of um of it almost looking like the the
the wall itself had peeled the paint
away so the piece is made out of peeling
paint from the wall so to play with this
idea of an organic process that was
somewhere between growing and decaying
that was caught in this this shift if
you will of scale and as you move closer
the piece has has you know becomes at
once smaller and more intimate but also
implies this kind of landscape that is
extremely expansive also this idea of it
almost looking like a construction site
of some very mundane happening you know
a leak in a wall and how this could be
transformed into something that fell
between the mundane and the profound
quickly go through um this was this is a
much more sort of to me obvious and a
very concrete way I mean obviously I'm
dealing with physicality so the idea of
scale actually represents itself in a
very physical way so you know uh been
lucky to have a lot of opportunities to
deal with very large spaces this is the
um entrance way to sfmoma and I did a
piece where I cut up a car into five
pieces and I wanted you to first come in
and actually not recognize what this
object was even though it was something
that we're very familiar with and we
know the scale of a car in relationship
to the scale of our body the whole
design is about the scale of your body
but to totally throw that off and make
it sort of an abstract spill of objects
but as you got off the elevator and the
top you you started to recognize what
what this object was and you you uh as
you turn turned around it you actually
learned more about what this object had
become and then you know you saw parts
like this from other parts of the
building the building has this Oculus
which allowed you to see scale from many
directions and then when you got up
close again you had this very very
intimate shift in scale where you were
almost inside the piece um and the last
for for each of the themes I sort of I
chose three pieces just to talk about um
these these drawings are actually
upstairs um and it's sort of interesting
to talk about these drawings in relation
to what sidarth read um and it's
interesting what you read Because I I've
read it many times but I didn't think of
this which you probably obviously
thought of but this very very sort of um
mundane simple idea physical idea of
weight that the that the the story that
or the the pieace starts with the weight
of the body transitioning from you
obviously know I didn't I didn't get
this but transitioning from the step
into the water and the physical weight
of your body in the boat and that ends
with this question of what is it what
does it mean to carry the weight of a
dead body and yet as the weight of the
body actually Life Is Lost out of it
absolutely which is really beautiful um
so this is a this is a um a series of
works that I did that were portraits and
I was asked to give a donation to a
benefit and I didn't have actually any
any physical work to give at the moment
and said well I'll do a portrait I'll
propose this idea people will buy a
portrait and what they will give me is
they'll give me 12 sem what they
describe as 12 seminal events in their
life um and they'll give this to me on a
list like a letter in an envelope and um
they'll give it to me I'll open it I'll
read it I will draw these events in no
in in no particular order tumbling from
one to the next and this idea of the
scale shifts of something and everyone
gave me an event like obvious events
like the death of a parent the birth of
a child but almost everyone had one or
two that were you know picking mushrooms
with their brother you know um losing
losing um their you know their um their
first you know their first letter from a
from um a lover like you know when in a
you know through the crack in a floor
these sort of very very small moments um
and I wanted to have this thing where
you had these kind of really the way
that we remember our lives and value our
lives where things tumbled from one to
the next um and they also for me it was
this idea of a portrait of how do you uh
you know fundamentally what a portrait
is about is how you bring out to the
interior the fundamental interior of
another person it's not about the
exterior it's about the inner emotion
and that also a portrait is really a
conversation or a relationship between
two individuals the artist and the
subject that this was actually a result
and an intimate an intimate experience
but it's like writing it was writing to
me in this idea of how a portrait could
also be like a letter well sometimes
your work has that notion of writing and
then it moves to something else and
there's a surprise and narrative to this
idea of an of how you move through space
and time there's an in introduction
moment and as you move through space
it's almost like the second chapter the
third chapter and and actually you've
written a bit about this idea in an
interview I remember that you were
talking about that notion of an aha
moment where the thing goes outside of
yourself and something happens and you
say it's almost like it's happening by
itself and that idea of creativity or
accident or the things that move from
one to the other and it seems to me that
that's a pretty important part of your
work and before I ask you to show some
more work I wanted to actually ask you
sidarth and that is that I realized that
somehow you had figured out that there
was a connection between you and Sarah
even before you met Sarah just from
looking at her work tell us what it was
that made you obsessed with this artist
before you met
her um I knew Sarah's work before I knew
Sarah um which is why I made it a point
to know
Sarah the rest is history
as um I had seen her work I'd seen first
I'd seen pictures of her work um and
then I went to the Whitney um to see I
don't know if you have a picture do you
have a picture of the B piece anyway um
I went to see the Whitney piece this was
uh in
200 yeah 200000 2000 yes 20 um I was
then a medical student in in in Boston
I'd come up to New York and I I have
always adored the Contemporary Arts and
so I went to the Whitney to see the
banial and I walked in to see Sarah
sculpture it's a little bit hard to
describe the experience uh one word
would be enveloping um the other word
would be C there's a Cosmic quality
about it that you you enter the piece
and you can't leave it it's like being
inside uh a trap um and um and you can
but it's Cosmic nonetheless right Cosmic
nonetheless yeah a cosmic trap right uh
and and you can't leave it you can't you
cannot take um you cannot take your eyes
off the piece um we we sometimes
actually we had this conversation once
about the about going to India and
seeing the Taj Mahal right the Taj Mahal
is the one the the word great beautiful
cliche um and yet when you actually
experience it in person and many people
here have it the experience is that you
cannot take your eyes off it it is that
it is so mesmerizing as a sculpture that
you just cannot take your eyes off it
and if you do and if you take your eyes
this is an interesting experience you
should it's almost an experiment you
turn your eyes away from it and you see
it again and it is as if it has come to
you and you're a baby and you're seeing
it a new and you can do this 10 times
and it will still appear new to you um
so there this you know there was that
kind of quality that was so mesmerizing
in Sarah's work but one of the things
that to me was very interesting and and
I want to come back to this idea is that
not only was was all of this kind of
this in the abstract sense uh Cosmic but
I was very interested in the emotional
scale of Sarah's work in the emotional
in the emotional quantities in Sarah's
work in the emotional death uh in grief
um and actually the titles in Sarah's B
of give away that grief you don't you
you you often sense the work in the in
the abstract you often sense the work
you might begin to sense the work in
Wonder but when you sense the work the
second time around when you turn your
eyes away and look at it again there is
grief for me um so sir you might showing
the picture of the of the of the the car
that you just just um and and and tell
us about the woman who uh talk to her
talk to you about the accident H that's
interesting I forgot about it I didn't
even know you knew that story um see
that's why we had this conversation yeah
um when I when I did this piece um
obviously it was a you know it was took
a lot of uh preparation before
beforehand and talks and I think it was
the director of development at the
Museum came up to me it's the type of
story I never tell about my work but um
you know came up to me in tears and she
said said that um she had lost uh I
think her child in a in a in a car
accident and that she was very against
and upset about the idea that this would
be in the space um but that uh it was
actually her the her favorite thing that
had ever happened there and that it was
transformative for her um and that she
realized that it had nothing to do with
that in in its um in the flat sense of
of that but in much more you know that
it was much more complex and layered and
for her a very liberan experience to say
so nice it's interesting that you should
pick up that idea of emotions because
most people who write about your work
don't usually write about the emotional
yeah side and yet almost all of us have
that experience to experience your work
is almost nonverbal there is something
that happens and yet it is interesting
that most most people don't write about
it you know I think theem emotion in
relationship to visual art has been it's
it's deep privilege the Lang and the
language around it is pretty you know
it's mostly it's articulated you know
it's articulated through the formal and
the cerebral usually I mean people
accept for example that emotion with
music is going to be probably your you
your central entrance um but they don't
accept that in the same way at least now
in the visual arts it didn't used be
like that I mean obviously in the
Renaissance and all places I know people
have that emotive content so for you to
pick that up it's sort of interesting um
well whenever I I mean as this is true
in general when I when I read something
when I see a piece of work when I see
Sarah's work um I usually enter it
through two kinds of approaches and
we've talked a little bit about this
before and one is one approach is what
is the question that the work is asking
um to me um very much the way you
started your book yes yeah what is the
question what is the question
um I mean it's fundamentally what a
scientific way of approaching creativity
right that a a laboratory always starts
with a question yes it is and and and
whenever you have a conversation with
with people who are in The Sciences who
are really in the Sciences the
conversation is always begins if it's
not stated it's certainly in in in the
larger realm and the larger realm is
what is the question you're asking and
and why why why you asking the question
um and then the second piece is what is
the what is the question and what is it
what is its emotional content what why
what is it what is this question why
does this question mean something why
does question mean something to you why
does this question mean something to me
if I feel as if if a book or a work of
art even answers one of these two
questions um it for me is incredibly
successful um if if it can if it can
answer both with work typically does uh
then you know then you get a get a
double you got a fan
here uh speaking of that idea of
creativity and what is the question uh
one of the things that I thought was
very interesting is that both of you
have that idea of
creativity and the experience that it's
almost like an out ofbody experience
you've written about it by saying that
there comes a moment where it's almost
like you've started the work and the
work takes off and you're almost
surprised by it and you've written said
also about that idea that in the
scientific world most of the time it's
think thought of it as iterative process
lots of details details leading on to
one another and there comes a moment
there's this powerful notion and a
theory where the puzzle almost as if
you're watching the puzzle solving
itself that's almost like an outof body
experience that notion of the aha moment
describe a little bit for us what is
that process for you in terms of
that you know movement that goes ahead
of itself yeah I mean I think they're
two there two interesting ways in my
mind to talk about that in relation to
my work I mean I think I think
um I think that at there's a certain
point for me when I'm making a work and
getting to that point is always
uh you know a lot I was thinking about
our discussions you know sidarth does
come to my studio all the time I read
his work and edit his WR his writing all
the time sometimes sometimes midnight
like last night I was reading have you
listen to her I listen I I'm I'm a I'm a
very good listener he's um yeah do you
listen to him yes yes I mean not always
that's not true you don't always listen
to me that's not true but I would say
that one of the things that I think is
really fascinating in working with him
creatively on his own work is he does
he's an incredibly quick editor he
changes things so quick I mean I'll say
I think that and he'll go deep and he'll
just erase it or he'll I mean he moves
everything around at this amazing speed
and there's this incred incredible
willingness to recreate the work in the
moment and you know one of the things
that I found um fascinating and
amazingly creatively Brave about the
book is that if you read the first
chapter of this book I think every
single page is different I I mean the
first sorry the first um draft and I
remember when he when his book came out
and we had a a little party I said I
said that that it was amazing how he
changed the willingness to change which
I think is so crucial um in in making a
successful work of art is um was was
amazing that the book had totally
changed and his editor gave us to talk
afterwards and said well if he changed
every page he knew he knew what he was
doing the whole time and just this the
but also this idea that you need to know
what you're doing is actually I think
overrated in some ways that you know
that of course you knew what he was
doing but but actually there's a you
think if the creative process takes its
full force that you as as the maker
there is this humble side to it where
you know that as you were talking about
there's a mo for me there's a moment
where the work start you're having a
conversation with the work getting it to
that point where and work talks back to
you work talks back to you and the work
I think what it for me the most
interesting thing in my work is always
what I least expected to have happened
and I recognize as being interesting and
then keep or frame in a certain way and
I I I think one of the things that's
incredible about visual art and seeing
visual art is that and I think it's true
in writing absolutely is when you're
reading or you're looking at it that
moment of the unexpected in the work is
actually translated to the viewer and
translated to the reader absolutely and
you know as you're reading it that this
could not not have been planned that it
happened in the moment and do you want
me to talk a little about this idea Ian
the second I mean the second part of
this is that I think um something that's
interesting oops plug in or
find uh oh should we plug in or find
another power source um the second thing
um that I was going to talk about in
relation to to this idea is I think that
um both of us are in our work um and
I'll talk about me in particular I'm
interested in this idea of of the work
being actually about experimentation
that a work actually
manifests a quality of experimentation
so that when you experience it you have
the sense that it's that and this has to
do with shifting scale it's not just a
scale but this Mo of of the experience
of the work of actually being caught in
a moment where something is perhaps
growing or dying succeeding or failing
um you know moving or or standing still
um so this is actually I put this up
this is a piece I did in the Venice
banala I put it up because I um now I'm
doing it again and this is uh in
1998 and um it it it was in the bigger
show yes it was in the yes now I'm doing
the Pavilion but it was in the group
show and um the idea you know the idea
that I was thinking of was this idea
that um I would put up lights first and
that the work would speed to that work
was almost had this idea of a life force
like it was a lie I mean it's a very old
idea in sculpture how do you breathe
life into an inanimate object and I was
interested and always been interested
this idea of how how an experience
becomes valuable and how an object
becomes valuable and to make it an
actual artwork where it felt like it had
was a had a Life Source or felt like it
behaved with some kind of need for
sustenance so the idea was that the
piece would accumulate around light and
then would speed to sort of survive and
AC and and and get to another point and
accumulate this obviously Maps things
like the way Urban environments grow
viruses grow but the but then the other
idea in this piece it was that it went
out this window which I discovered and
opened much like opening what Happ
upstairs right and there was an arm that
went into the water and this someone
said that CI never met a wall that she
didn't want to
break and and it had an arm that went
out into the water and it B it bounced
on the water and it tapped back on the
window so this this idea that it almost
felt like the piece itself was an
experiment this was a really fundamental
idea in this piece that I did at the
Highline where it um it's called you
know it's called a model for a habitat
and it was interesting this idea of some
of like a scientific model or some are
you modeling Behavior are you modeling
the way something might become um and I
wanted to make a piece um but it was
really an experiment the Highline I
think is an incredibly successful
experiment in urban space period and it
was really this question of H of what
could you add to it doesn't need artwork
it is a really successful in my mind
kind of artwork in itself um and so the
challenge of not making something that
was really just like plop art and that
you don't really need there because it's
such an incredible experience um so I
thought you know the one thing that it's
framed this incredible um natural
environment that even used to exist
there but the one thing that it hasn't
framed is the fact that there are these
this there is actually this very vibrant
wildlife of birds bees butterflies that
that survive everywhere in our city and
particularly this is like a locust for
that so to make almost a sculpture that
framed their existence um so I I made
this this it's making you see something
that you otherwise might not see that's
the point well also that's everywhere
around you I mean one of the funny
things is that this apparently is the
most photographed place in the Highline
and it's mostly people photographing
bird when they see it how many times do
you see a bird in New York all the time
but all of a sudden it's there's a bird
let's get a picture with it so this idea
of drawing your ATT attention to their
presence um was was really the idea and
obviously scale shifts I mean this piece
is very related to the work upstairs in
terms of perspective in terms of having
you come to a minute B piece of bird
seed to the point at the tip of the
Empire State Building for example um and
the last point that I think is
interesting to me about experiment was I
wanted people to engage that it should
always be like the experience had to be
an you know an engagement with that
experience in space so the final kind of
solution when I come thinking like this
is this is going to like this is set for
failure to do a sculpture on the
Highline because you can't compete with
the location so the the final thing that
I think was like sort of an aha moment
in terms of conceptualizing it was okay
I'm going to it's a prominade and one of
the great things again is what they
didn't do they did nothing you walk
there that's all all you do you have no
choices you can only walk so to make the
prominade actually uh bict the piece
itself so that you you see it you enter
it you leave it um and that the piece
grows from north to south on one side
and south to North than the other I mean
it seems to me that in a way what you're
talking about is that you had a broad
concept yeah you were thinking about the
location yeah and then in the place
things happen yes which is most people
and think of your work as like you're
bringing gazillion things you figured it
out and then you're going to put it in
there so that you are prepared in that s
it's very Zen likee that you have
complete practice you have thought it
and then you let yourself go sure I mean
it's always a balance right it's a
balance that's and that you want the
viewer to also participate in that
notion of surprise and almost a feeling
that something has happened when you
were writing the book did you have those
moments as well I mean it seems I felt
it when I was reading it I mean you know
one interesting feature of of of of
writing this book is that one
interesting feature of experiments is
that you have to let experiments go
wrong um and if you don't let
experiments go wrong you have to be
hamfisted sometimes um there's a there's
a very famous quote by um Wolf Gang poy
who's a famous physicist one of my
favorite quotes by him um Wolf Gang poy
was very eccentric and um he um was once
brought a thesis of a young student to
judge and he looked at the thesis and he
said it's so bad that it's not even
[Laughter]
wrong um so I thought that I would
invert wolfang Po's principle and write
sometimes write things that were so
wrong that they couldn't be bad um so in
other words you have to let yourself do
very wrong things and and and then in
that vulnerability you discover
something important about yourself so
I'm going to read a passage actually I
hadn't marked this passage this is
marked as was talking to you upstairs I
didn't mark this passage but um but
here's a passage which has no place as
far as I can see has really no place in
a book on cancer but every time I took
it out it felt as if there was a there
was an itch for this passage um now you
wouldn't know this but I I tried to take
it out many many times and every time I
would come back and say you know that's
it's just missing it has to go back in
there so it's a passage that starts uh
about a time when I'm beginning to to
take care of patients mature as a as a
fellow um and it begins with primoli one
of my favorite authors The Italian
memoirist primoli who survived a
concentration camp and then navigated
his way through a blasted Germany to his
native Trin often remarked that among
the most fatal qualities of the camp was
its ability to erase the idea of a life
outside and Beyond itself a person's
past and present were anihilated as a
matter of course to be in the camps was
to abnegate history identity and
personality but it was the Eraser of the
future that was the most chilling with
that Annihilation Levi wrote came a
moral and spiritual death that
perpetuated the status quo of
imprisonment if no life exists beyond
the camp then the distorted logic by
which the camp operates becomes life as
usual now cancer is not a concentration
camp but it shares the quality of
inhalation it negates the possibility of
life outside and Beyond itself it
subsumes all living the daily life of a
patient becomes so intensely preoccupied
with his or her illness that the world
outside F Fades away how to overcome him
became my obsession the journalist and
poet Max Lerner wrote about the lymphoma
in his spleen if it was going to be a
combat then I had to engage it with
everything I had knowledge and Gile ways
covert as well as overt and then this is
the passage that's particularly weird it
gets weirder and weirder uh in a book on
cancer I was not immune to this
compulsive preoccupation either in the
summer of 2005 as my fellowship hurdled
to its end I experienced perhaps the
singularly transforming event in my life
the birth of my daughter glowing
beautiful and cherubic Leela was born on
a warm night at Massachusetts General
Hospital then swaddled in blankets and
brought to the newborn unit on the 14th
floor the unit is directly across from
the cancer W the opposition of the two
is hardly a coincidence as a medical
procedure child birth is least likely to
involve infectious complications and
thus the safest neighbor to award where
any infection can turn into a lethal
Rampage as in so much in medicine the
jux to position between the two WS is
purely functional and yet just as purely
profound
I would like to see this moment I would
like to see myself at my wife's side
awaiting the miraculous moment of my
daughter's birth as most fathers do but
in truth I was gowned and gloved Like a
Surgeon with a blue sterile sheet spread
out in front of me and a long syringe in
my hands poised to harvest the maroon
gush of blood from the umbilical cord
when I cut that cord part of me was the
father but the other part was an
oncologist umil Cord Blood contains one
of the richest known sources of blood
forming stem cells cells that can be
stored away in cryobanks and used for
bone marrow transplantation to treat
leukemia in the future an intensely
precious resource which is often flushed
down the sink in hospitals The Midwives
rolled their eyes the obstetrician and
old friend asked jokingly if I ever
stopped thinking about my work but I was
too far steeped in the study of blood to
ignore my instincts in the transplant
rooms across that very hallway were
patients for whom I had scarred tishy
Banks Across the Nation for one or two
pints of these same stem cells even in
this life affirming of all moments the
shadow of malignancy and death were
forever lurking on my psyche so again
you know why why why are you writing a
history of cancer in which you all of a
sudden decide to insert the birth of
your child I don't know but it had to be
there and there was no way I showed it
to n gram my editor and she said if you
feel it's right leave it in and it it's
in and that is quoted more often yeah
that pass is quoted of your other
passages for sure but it seems to me
that partly what you're doing there is
is that notion of emotion and cerebral
and it's something that both of you seem
to really play with a lot and terms of
whether it's kind of going in and then
coming out at a different place and not
always knowing where that's going to
come out I was going to ask you why you
felt that that Primo Lei quote or the
passage you really wanted to take it out
well partly because it's so profound the
way you make that connection actually
partly because I was I'm I'm so afraid
of primoi because he is such an amazing
writer uh it's like uh it's like it's as
if Sarah put a little piece of uh you
know a piece of the edge of the face of
the Mona Lisa in her in her sculpture it
it it's it's fearsome what's interesting
about Primo Ley of course is that if he
whenever he was asked are you a writer
he would say no actually I'm a
chemist um and and how do you answer
that question I say I don't I don't
know um but he always used to say I'm a
chemist um and so that's the problem the
problem is that you have this figure um
and I had ad you you know survival in
aitz I think is is a a book to end all
books um uh I keep reading it over and
over again for for what's interesting
about it is as a book to me as a writer
to me as to experience that book is to
remember that there is no Moment In the
book book where emotion comes blasting
out of the pages it is a cold book the
tone of the book is cool and yet in that
cool tone is conveyed the
central monstrosity of the 20th century
how do you do that how do you manage
without once without once raising the
tone of the book to convey the
incredible quality I mean that's why I'm
saying I was afraid of I I still am uh
but not so afraid but not afraid of
who's afraid of P Ley not me so speaking
of reading I mean I I it's hard for me
to imagine here you are an oncologist
you're in the cancer patients you're
writing 15 minutes a day and you're
reading all this stuff are you a big
reader too and do you guys share what
you're reading and and affect each other
that way yeah I mean he gets books sent
to him now so much he he I mean he reads
reads he eats books um every night so
you know but I get I get the them
afterwards and when he was writing that
book I have to say that I read it about
10 times so I didn't have that as much
time to read other things but you're too
busy reading that and doing your work
right but we I
read you know I would say 20% of what I
read is actually just what I comes from
my own he doesn't read at all but I
would say 80% is I mean that's the great
thing about writing a book is actually
we have books in all over the house that
are sent to us and books that he's
researching and you can pick one up
there's five in the bathroom and another
so yes but he's he has a he has an
ability to read and he read Harry Potter
in one
night
obsessively yeah so it's it's certainly
and do you also then suggest things that
you're looking at that you like that
then you will say sidar Let's go see
that oh absolutely yeah I mean I think
probably you know 90% of what he sees
visually is for me but like for example
the Primo Levy book is been actually is
was both of our one of both of our very
very favorite books before we knew each
other um George Orwell is one of our
both of our favorite writers before we
knew each other a aora is a place where
both of us were obsessed with India so
you going to go there Aur are these
great monuments some of you know this
and Sarah is obsessed with them and she
hasn't been so we're going to figure
this out next time not just to visit the
family as my husband would tell me you
know let's do something Beyond visiting
family you know this is important
actually um going to switch the subject
slightly since we are into a jantani
Laura and the fact is that you're going
to India a lot both of you obviously
come from um really audite educated and
Indian family in yourk case and in yourk
case Chinese American mixed
family often when people talk about
distinguished people like yourselves
they don't want to talk about cultural
imprint or if there is one how do you
think that the cultural upbringing for
both of you has affected your work your
thinking and how is it affecting
you um Visa each other
[Laughter]
you know I mean I think there are many
many ways to approach that question and
um for me I think the most interesting
way to approach it is is to think about
complexity I mean the levels of
complexity in that question uh are so
infinite I mean the idea of what a
cultural identity what is it what is the
you know what does it mean if we say
what does India mean to you like
everyone in this room is going so it's
so hard to actually have that
conversation without first starting with
what culture what that even means um and
for me I think it means about it means a
celebration of complexity right which is
something that I'm interested in my work
that they it's a layering that keeps
coming back absolutely and that
something you know you can't Define
things I think like that the minute you
define them they've shifted too this the
slippery notion of that um the idea of
how it's more for me interesting to look
at Borders where things you know I mean
for me the show at Agia Society is all
about this line between where a drawing
becomes a sculpture and how something
can sit between that and and exist in
both places at the same time and and
also even as you're watching it flip
between the two so that things are are
again they're live they're shifting
they're fragile defining them is almost
impossible so I think fundamentally my
my um my the most interesting way for me
to approach that question is to try and
make it
complex rather than it's also contextual
so at certain times certain things come
up I mean it seems to me that you might
not have done this show with the idea of
Shifting perspectives and Chinese
landcare were it not the AG Society I
mean I think for the I think the idea
for the age Society was to make a very
precise show right um that had two
things in mind one for me was just about
was about drawing but fundamentally that
drawing could be a way of seeing process
that drawing in some ways is this
notetaking it's like you know wouldn't
it be interesting to read the first
notes that sidarth wrote wouldn't it be
amazing to see you know the draw the
first drawing that you know uh Frank
Gary made for his Frank Gary house that
that that drawing can be sort of the
skeleton and the the as you know this
idea that what where did what's the
where's the drop in that starts the
entire process the Rings falling out and
so that drawing could be
that I have two kinds of answers to the
question one is perverse and one is less
perverse
uh let me give you the perverse answer
for I mean I think it's it's it's an
interesting answer when you Abraham vazi
who right youve talked to here
absolutely yeah uh Abraham verg's first
book his first book yes his first my own
country yeah it's called my own country
um now it's it's a very subversive title
because Abraham vazi comes his family
comes from India and then they lived in
Africa for a long time and then uh vazi
got a job uh working in Tennessee right
it's in the South somewhere yeah that's
right Tennesse so he got he got a job
working in Tennessee and then very
interesting thing happens a physician
also he's a physician um and a very
interesting thing happens to vazi in
Tennessee he is sitting in rural
Tennessee being a doctor and all of a
sudden he starts noticing young men
typically men coming in from New York um
with with horrible infections and
complications of infections um and it's
because what has happened is that aids
has hit New York City and uh these young
men are twice rejected they're twice
orphaned they were essentially thrown
out of their homes um typically because
of being homosexual in Tennessee so they
were orphaned then they go to New York
uh and now come back to the home that
they were thrown out of because no one
else will take care of them um and so
they are now returning back to Tennessee
and so it's almost like an echo of the
larger catastrophe that is happening in
New York and vergaz my own country is
Tennessee and he says that in fact he
discovers he makes it by becoming the
physician to these men um he discovers
his own country his own country is not
South India his own country is not
Africa but it is in fact Tennessee and
to me that's a very interesting idea
that your own country is the country of
your elected Affinity um and therefore
it by its very nature transcends culture
there is there is everything about India
in this book but there's nothing about
India in this book um and that is very
important um and therefore it's your
decision whether you want how you want
to read it it's your decision how you
want to read verg's book um how you come
to it is your own country um and it is a
it's a very unique uh it's a very unique
uh decision sometimes when I'm feeling
particularly perverse and someone says
to me are you Indian I say no I'm
actually from Lithuania
uh I said depends on the
day so so so that's that's that's one
answer I mean and I think for me my own
country happens to be in this book
happens to be the cancer WS happens to
be
transnational uh happens to be uh the
fact that that my culture U had enough
inside it to be able to give me the
freedom to to transcend that culture um
that freedom is my cultural inheritance
that the freedom that I don't have to
write about India is my is is is the
greatest gift that India gave me um uh
so that's that's that's one answer the
second answer goes back a little bit and
we were talking about this earlier
there's of course that famous Legend in
in Indian mythology of abim Manu um and
the legend is and for people who don't
know this abanu was is is in his
mother's womb he's krishna's son and
Krishna has given is has talked so often
about the battlefield of kurukshetra
talks so often and particularly Krishna
is interested there many versions of the
story I'm telling one version but
particular Krishna is interested in a
very very lethal battle formation uh
which is a trap to a soldier that that
solders surround you it's called a
chakra viu um it plays a very large role
it's kind of a Labyrinth of soldiers in
which the soldiers surround you and you
cannot work your way out of that
Labyrinth and Krishna has said this so
many times to his why he described this
Labyrinth he describes the strategy and
at one point of time he makes a mistake
and as I said there are many versions of
the story and abim Manu who has heard
this so many times says from the womb he
says that's a mistake um you made a
mistake to his father from the womb he
says You' made a mistake and in fact the
correct formation is this and Krishna is
so hurt and angry at abim Manu that he
says it will be your curse that when
this moment happens to you as an adult
you will not be able to find your way
out of the chakra and this is how Banu
dies if he gets at the moment war in the
war at the moment that he is stuck in
the chakra viu and the Labyrinth of is
all around him he forgets the way out
because he had his father had cursed him
and it's impossible now this is the
problem with being
Bengal uh this is correct because now we
go to the next place right because
that's right because there is tore right
and as you're sitting in the womb of
being Bengali you are
being tagor is insinuating his way as
only tagor can but not only tagor Bal
has a much richer tradition of writing
but tagor is in ating his way into your
blood and into your veins and the
question is how do you as a writer get
rid of him you know how do you how to
how you so I just want to point out that
here you are talking about transcending
cultures and right there you're talking
about being a Bengali well so right
interesting contradiction or Lithuanian
I mean I often have said that for many
of us that I've said at least I have six
identities sometimes I'm an Indian who
lives in America Friday is sometimes I'm
an American who happens to be from India
sometimes I'm just a Gujarati girl who
is in New York and each one of these are
very real but they're just completely
different and I think to some extent
what you're talking about both of you is
that it's sort of the best of what art
does which is that it's both off a place
and it has a capacity to transcend a
place and that those of us who are
fortunate enough to have layered
identities we can con L play that
everyone has and and we all have it but
in fact sometimes it's much more so
because you know I mean you grew up in
Delhi you come from Bengal you have a
sense of a Bengali which has always I
think is very interesting that in India
no matter where you are and your family
has been five generations in South India
but somebody says who are you said I'm a
Gujarati 500 years what are you talking
about no I'm a Gatti you know so there
is that idea of specific it but also
transcending it um in terms of your kids
I mean I first of all I have to say you
reading you working you both are in you
in your studio what do you for fun with
your
kids do you have time we have lots of
time is that true you have lots of time
I mean we I we feel like we you know do
not no I feel like it uh I feel like
every I mean what do we do for it we
every weekend I mean I I love New York
we had to I going back and forth between
Boston um when we for a while because he
was in Cambridge I mean New York what's
not to do with your children are you
walk out I mean we live across the
street from the Reuben Art Museum where
you know Helen Abbot is we worked with
you know you can walk over there every
afternoon we were at the Islamic
Galleries at the Metropolitan Museum I
mean you know you you your children
don't need you know you don't need to do
things with your children the things in
New York appear so your fun things to do
are going to museums and or reading
reading reading or making frch did you
need Harry Potter to your girls not yet
I think uh Leela would be scared to
death of Harry Potter as I was but I was
reading it as this is how it should be
experienced she should be getting chills
and I think that she if I read it to her
she would be getting chills too so I'm
was going to wait for her to experience
them herself I'm going to open it up to
the audience but I have one last
question and that is that here you both
are prime of your
career you've finished an amazing book
you're going to you know last time when
you worked on the book you talked a lot
about this idea of really just staying
the course answering the question and
you didn't have the entire baggage of
bullet surprise and the guardian and
everything else um as and you now are
going on and you will represent the
United States and the Venice
pale do you feel the weight of the kind
of accomplishment and how do you do a
way like you were saying in your book
keep undoing stuff to keep moving to the
next level so what's your next project
um so I no
pressure um I haven't announced my next
project actually and I think my my
editors are somewhere here my Publishers
are somewhere here so I'm I'm going to
um I'm going to tell you a little bit
about it but actually I don't know the
answer myself um I was going to write a
small book um and it is small in size um
but it's I think it's not going to be
unfortunately small in size um I'm I'm
interested in the idea of inheritance um
and what inheritance does how
inheritance happens and by inheritance I
don't just mean biological inheritance I
mean inheritance as an idea in human
history um and I'm interested
particularly in the idea of the future
inheritance uh what if what what happens
when we begin to manipulate inheritance
this is the genome The genome um and and
and what happens when you manipulate
inheritance so much so that you can have
uh you are undoing one of the
fundamental forces that has glued
kinship together kinship is glued
through inheritance uh and what would
the future begin to be like if that
became unglued um Can it ever become
unglued um and of course the flip side
of that question is what is then if
inheritance become unglued what happens
to our understanding of legacy and
mortality so these are early days I
don't know uh how these will coales into
a book do you feel the pressure that it
has to be as successful or are you not
worried about that uh I think if you
feel the the Min that pressure is
poisonous uh to anything that's creative
um I really think that you have to start
from scratch you have to be you have to
not be an expert to write to make work I
mean if you're an expert you lose that
which is the expertise is really really
really poisonous to uh to anything
that's creative U it immediately numbs
you um and so I try you try to not be an
expert um and that's my approach to
it what are you thinking about for
Venice yeah Venice is for me Venice is I
mean
I'm a
[Laughter]
doctor
two it's a rare
moment usually he's hiding when
someone's I'm not a
doctor I have delivered a child on the
channel
accomplishes I I have not thank god um
so you know Venice is a for me it feels
like for me a perfect opportunity I mean
I
love trying to create transformative
spaces you know to interact with
buildings to the idea that there's a a
chain of locations that I can uh that
can wax and Wayne in terms of scale and
location um and obviously you know I I
like to make pieces in spaces where
people who never see Contemporary Arts
see them and where they're discovered in
you know in spaces that we don't usually
see art but if you're going to make a
piece for an audience that is you know
really looking really thinking about
Contemporary Art there's no other
International venue so it's for me it's
extremely exciting you know and um I'm
already I've been thinking about it and
I'm already making it and it's it's
exciting right wait I feel energized I
don't feel know I don't feel burdened in
any way so fabulous yeah and and what
are the slides that what are the other
other two slides can I I have a few more
slides but maybe we should open it to
the audience
yeah floor is yours we can't really see
you please um raise your
hand are you okay yeah there's a hand
there let me please identify yourself
and there's right here that's good
there's one there and that back
here um we're talking about art and
we're talking use the microphone please
we're talking about art and we're
talking about cancer and I'm very
curious in the
combination if as a doctor who deals
with cancer patients if you feel there's
a strong um component in the Arts that
can be effective in a positive or A
negative way with a cancer patient um I
I think the quick answer is yes but it
depends on the kind of art and the kind
of patient um I think it depends on some
people um some people want to write some
people want to engage in the in the
visual World um and it can often be very
it can often be a very positive
experience um but the problem is that
there's a kind of um there is a kind of
Dogma that says that if you're sick you
must create um uh which I which patients
find very you know it's kind of a weird
pressure to put on yourself you already
got so much on your plate if on top of
that now you're expected to create
something about your illness my goodness
um so um I my usual recommendation is
you know chicken soup before the
painting if you can you know take care
of the take care of your material needs
first if it happens to express yourself
if you happen to express yourself
artistically um that's a wonderful thing
but I but again I I I try not to put you
know one additional
load on on people whose lives have been
enveloped by something
already music or art in a um paliative
way of therapy in the therapeutic sense
yeah paliative yes therapeutic I mean if
paliative is therapeutic I don't want to
make an artificial distinction between
the two uh but if you if you you know
there is a school of thinking that that
um that that that engagement in the Arts
will somehow become translated beyond
the paliative beyond the psyche into the
physical um I'm a little I'm a little
suspicious of this kind of uh thinking
uh again partly because it It ultimately
uh tries to engage the psych which I
don't feel particularly comfortable with
cancer ultimately is a genetic disease
is a disease in of alterations of genes
in cells that lead to unregulated
disregulated Cellular growth um we have
yet to connect the psyche to a mechanism
to cause mutations or change the biology
of cancer so I'm a little uncomfortable
with this idea on the flip side you know
does it help with healing does it help
people who really want to be engaged in
in in the musical world Etc absolutely
um absolutely but but I I I'd also try
to make sure that the psyche doesn't
intervene too much on on patients
because it becomes for me a mechanism to
blame a patient you aren't getting
better because your psyche isn't good
enough um you you you have cancer and
they are very this is a medieval thought
which has persisted even today you have
cancer because your psyche is
malfunctioning um it is an it can become
incredibly negative it can become
incredibly blame blame filling so I'm
very careful to discriminate between
those applications of the psyche U and
you know the more paliative but would
you say that in terms of healing
and not so much that whether it's caused
or cured but how people deal with
healing that the psyche has some role to
play absolutely but that doesn't mean
that the psyche has some role to you
know music can seem awful to someone in
that process of healing depends on what
that is yeah depends on what that is I I
have a um um there was there was a as I
said I was just thinking about this I
was delivering a there was a there was a
wonderful couple that came to my care uh
when I was a medical student at Mass
General Hospital um and she was
delivering a child and they were very
very involved in in in the in in music
and particularly love new age music and
the the the man at the wife's request
brought um whale songs to play while the
woman was giving birth and it all
started off very nicely the whale songs
were playing in the background there was
a candle etc etc and all of a sudden you
know the birth began to happen and I I
remember this very vividly um this woman
screaming to her husband can you shut
that thing off
so um she said she said more actually
exact there were some other words
probably right right so for her it was
not paliative
anymore there's a hand
here so there's a concept in finance
called the creative destruction that's
Trumpeter right so the idea that uh the
financial economic ecosystem gets to
create only through a destructive
process and in interestingly enough we
find that political institutions social
institutions very often resist that
destructive process because there's an
incumbency effect and and as a result
you don't make progress now from a micro
standpoint you both have expressed your
experience with death and life right but
from a macro
experience does an artist have to
somebody who's creative does somebody
have to experience the destructive
process on a macro level thrust
themselves in some of the things that
are going on in the world today to be
able to really be able to communicate to
the audience that is to say do you have
to go to one of the hot spots of the
world where things are changing and and
you're exper to experience creative
destruction so in order to be able to
communicate more effectively both as an
artist as a
doctor I me I mean I'm I would start
with the you know Emily Dickinson came
up before she seems like a good example
of someone who barely left her house and
wrote you know the most Transcendent
poetry some of the most Transcendent
poetry at least in this country so I
think you know I mean I always say about
sar's book that it's that it's a book
about Humanity it's not actually you
know it is a book about cancer but
fundamentally why it is so readable um
and so meaningful to anyone is that it's
about Humanity so you know and Emily
dick bums are really about that um of
course as I think all work so I don't
think that that I think that that can be
Central to a work of art but it does not
have to be yeah the reason I
mentioned obviously right right Primo
Levy went through one of the most you
know impactful and you admire him as a
writer so I was just wondering since
there's so much going on in the world
does that mean your next thing has to be
to thrust yourself into one of those
macro situations well you know there's a
there's a there's a there's a lovely uh
uh anecdote about um about Jean Miro um
who was once once a a journalist uh went
I think I paraphrase all of these I
think they're probably not true by the
time I've made them up in my R but but
apparently a journalist once went to moo
and said you know there's a Triad of
Spanish artists there's Picasso there's
Dal and then there's moo and Picasso is
essentially lives in Paris with 15 women
um you know Dolly is Al even further out
there but John mro spent all his much of
his life married to the same woman in
the same Village in um in this thing in
this place in rural Spain and so the
journalist said well what about you and
and mro famously said the parade marches
inside me um and so um and it go goes
back to you know if you go to if you go
to Amherst um you see Emily Dickinson's
if you see Emily Dickinson's desk
it is this big and from that desk she
looked out onto a window which is about
this big and through that on that desk
and through that window she could see
the entire
Cosmos um you don't need to you know you
don't need to go to the Spanish War to
see uh to see human beings that way but
I would say the concept of creative
destruction is something both of you
continue to play with yes as you talk
about having knowledge and unlearning it
to be able to put yourself in
there creative destruction the process
of your whether you go somewhere else or
not so I think that's the location can
be inside but the instruction can be
just as just as
acute another hand yes well thank you
very much for the communication among
you but also as a couple how you react
um my I wanted to mention about Primo
Levi because I think it is very
important important we have to remember
that Primo Levi you could say well he
wanted to take off his weight of things
and put them in the books but he also
committed suicide yes so it's a very
important
distinction the other thing is that I
I'm looking at your at the video at
the slide yeah yes at the slide thank
you and uh I'm looking at uh how you see
as
a as a not a painter or a
scientist but it is what you give and
when you look at this people can see so
many different things you know we C the
ey of a
Beholder now I know what I know about
what I see but after uh you
do your peace you're talking also about
that that moment of truth in which you
say that's how did I do it right now
once you separate from you and you
forgot about how you do it tell me how
do you feel now about it what are you
looking at when you see it so that's
your question
yes just want to make sure right um it's
interesting because this this um this
slide I think actually has a lot to do
with a point that we jumped off of that
I didn't know you were going to talk
about but sadar said you know sometimes
it's important to be just hamfisted and
to in to sort of do the mo you know he
was talking about you so sort of the
dumbest question that can be asked about
your work and I was I brought this slide
in terms of the idea of experimentation
and at a certain point in my work I
started realizing this idea that that
actually when you brought up Arthur
Danto he made interesting point to me he
said your work is like a model but not
like an architectural model because an
architectural model is built as a
standin for something to be built but it
it's it's actually like a scientific
model because it demonstrates Behavior
which I thought was a very nice idea um
and so I actually decided with this
piece to just do to actually make a kind
of what is a kind of scientific model
and I it was sort of the this to me it
was sort of the dumbest actually quite
dumb idea it was so simple but I decided
to make this to make something the the
title of this is portable planetarium
this idea of making a
planetarium that I was kind of absurd
because it was not portable because it's
so fragile and its makeup and it was
modeling this this thing that is so
magnificent but in this very hamfisted
way um and then also like a personal
Planetarium and uh your question is
interesting particularly to this slide
because um it became a really uh people
were really attracted to this piece and
I and after I made it I I was also very
fond of this piece and I I couldn't I I
realized it actually has to do with this
idea of scale shift and that when you
walked in you immediately recognized it
as a planet which to me also seemed very
antithetical in my work that you would
Orient yourself in relation to a planet
and it's actually an image that I think
we are all familiar with through
pictures and through films that we we
all know what the earth looks like here
but and usually what happens when you
scale shift in famously so with the
Charles and Ray Ames um uh powers of 10
when you scale but in any image when you
see the Earth from far away which of
course is something that we've never
none of one I don't think unless there's
an astronaut here has ever done when you
when you go towards when you pull out
from it you actually get further and
further and there is this overwhelming
fundamental realization that we are in
time and space tiny meaningless specs
but in this piece piece as you get
closer to it and it's actually is a
projector in in a very silly mundane way
which has a light and a piece of toilet
paper that go like this over a black
piece of paper with holes in it but
create create a cosmic a solar system so
the whole thing is a so is actually just
a projector but or a contraption that
projects but you actually enter into it
and when you as the closer you get to
the pl the planet the the larger it
becomes around you and when you get into
to it it's almost like you're in a cave
or in a hut and it's actually very
welcoming and it has this opposite
effect that we actually I think actually
have learned to to as we see the Earth
we actually have this fundamental
whether I this is what I think about
this with this fundamental feeling of
both a connection but then a a a
profound sense of being meaningless and
in this piece as you enter you actually
are the center of the earth which is
which never happens so to me this this
piece had this incredible flipping of
interior exterior of distance and
intimacy of feeling like in this
palladian sense you're the center of the
earth and and you're also out out in in
non-existent I think there is a reason
why you connected to sidarth because
it's very indic notion of a tiny Speck
that is totally relationally connected
to Cosmos and you see yourself both in
that big and a small scale at the same
time
relationally and it continues to shift
so see it's meant to
be on that note I think we have just
reached the time thank
you
um I I hope that all of you had as much
fun as we did and please join us for a
reception that's in the garden court and
there are some signed books both
siddarth's book and also the exhibition
catalog of Sarah's work right here at
the society so please join us and we
will see you shortly thank you